<p>Web pages have generally become much more bulky in recent years. The trends for JavaScript-based functionality enhancements and the popularisation of digital photography have led to larger amounts of data being transferred (downloaded) per page and I can&#8217;t see a reversal of this happening any time soon.</p>
<p>If you&#8217;re using a mobile device such as an IPhone, IPad, Android handset or indeed any other device on anything other than a very consistently fast web connection, you&#8217;ll no doubt have experienced the frustration of slow page loads. So what can web developers do to improve the situation? We&#8217;re extremely unlikely to be able to convince web designers to use less graphical content in their layouts and customers certainly won&#8217;t like being advised not to upload imagery along with their textual content&#8230;so we need to make improvements from the source.</p>
<p>The 2 major factors (aside from the data connection which, beyond the data centre we have essentially no control over) in web page download speed are:</p>
<ol>
<li>The amount of data which has to be downloaded in order to display the web page &#8211; This comprises source code (E.G. HTML, JavaScript, CSS etc) and media items (E.G. Images, Movies, Sound files etc)</li>
<li>The number of HTTP requests made &#8211; Each item (E.G. an Image, a JavaScript or CSS file) which is downloaded requires an HTTP request and each HTTP request has a latency, a delay which further slows down the page load</li>
</ol>
<p>There are 4 fairly simple improvements which can almost always be made to a website which will provide some pretty big improvements alongside the traditional advice of &#8220;Export your JPEGs on the lowest acceptable quality setting&#8221;:</p>
<ol>
<li><a href="http://code.google.com/p/minify/" target="_blank">Minification</a> &#8211; Combining same-type source files (E.G. JavaScript, CSS etc) into a single file (to reduce the number of HTTP requests) and compressing that single file (removing unnecessary data to reduce the downloaded file size)</li>
<li><a href="//thedotproduct.org/a-simple-example-of-css-sprites/" target="_blank">CSS Sprites</a> &#8211; Combining all possible CSS-specified images into a single image file (to reduce the number of HTTP requests)</li>
<li>Serving page assets (E.G. JavaScript, CSS, Images etc) from multiple (sub)domains. Web browsers have an in-built (or default) maximum number of concurrent connections which they will make, usually this limit is on a per-sub-domain basis. The theory is that the more concurrent connections will result in a shorter web page download time. You can read more about default maximum number of concurrent connections for each of the major web browsers <a href="http://www.stevesouders.com/blog/2008/03/20/roundup-on-parallel-connections/" target="_blank">here</a>.<br />
Of course, your (sub)domains can be synonyms (E.G. CNAMEs) for the each other, as far as the browser is concernced, that&#8217;s still a different (sub)domain.<br />
You should be aware that using more concurrent connections is very likely to increase your web server load so if your server margins are tight, proceed with caution!</li>
<li><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_compression" target="_blank">Web server output compression</a> (HTTP compression) &#8211; Virtually every vaguely modern web server and web browser supports compression/decompression of web page source code, usually via GZip and/or Deflate methods &#8211; this works in a very similar way to &#8220;zipping&#8221; a file on your computer. Enabling output compression is usually as simple as changing a setting in your web server configuration file &#8211; I&#8217;d suggest searching the web for a tutorial if you don&#8217;t know how to do this.</li>
</ol>
<p>On top of this, you should think about your markup, front-end scripts and stylesheets &#8211; keep it as minimal as you can whilst supporting all those nasty legacy web browsers (IE6 &#8211; that means you!).</p>
<p>So there we have it, 4 pretty simple steps to help combat the 2 biggest demons of web page download speed, data size and number of HTTP connections.</p>
<p>I hope that helps&#8230;</p>
<p>Cheers</p>