 <p>This is a really quick post as i&#8217;ve been coding for a few hours and need to call it a day&#8230;</p>
<p>So i was working on my new website which uses a lot of HTML5, CSS3 etc. and shows Youtube videos, so naturally I wanted to use the Youtube HTML5 embed method (which i still don&#8217;t really like as it&#8217;s an ugly iframe). I was using some of the newer HTML5 iframe attributes in an effort to be &#8220;clever&#8221;, once of which was the sandbox attribute. The reason for using this was to add as much security as i could since Youtube is a third-party website and i take that risk seriously &#8211; i have no control over their content.</p>
<p>Anyway, to cut a long story short, the youtube videos worked fine in Firefox 11 but not in Chrome. I tried disabling all sorts of CSS, JS etc. but it finally occurred to me i should look at the Youtube iframe markup so i naturally removed the attributes i was least familiar with and hey presto, removing the sandbox iframe attribute cured the problem.</p>
<p>Thinking about this a little further, it&#8217;s pretty obvious that the <a href="http://www.w3schools.com/html5/att_iframe_sandbox.asp" target="_blank">HTML5 iframe sandbox attribute</a> would break the Youtube video since it imposes some severe restrictions on the iframe. I wanted to share this in the hope it saves someone else some time.</p>
<p>Cheers!</p>
<p>UPDATE: I&#8217;d imagine from a quick look that the same goes for Safari which also supports the HTML5 iframe sandbox attribute, most other browsers currently don&#8217;t</p>